getting_started/adv_agenda.rst, before:

.. include:: ../cyverse_rst_defined_substitutions.txt

|CyVerse_logo2|_

|Home_Icon|_
`Learning Center Home <http://learning.cyverse.org/>`_

**Agenda**
==========

Advanced Workshop Days are at the following times: 
9:00AM–1:00PM US Pacific Time (12:00PM–4:00PM US Eastern Time)


.. IMPORTANT::

    Please fill out the `weekly lesson feedback form <https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScEFhSXB52OegkXwXE0HISxIjCuBIiyi-qD4DYuDHhRe1k3fg/viewform?usp=sf_link>`_


Below are the schedule and classroom materials for Container Camp 2021.

This workshop runs under a `Code of Conduct <../getting_started/main.html>`_.
Please respect it and be excellent to each other!

Twitter hash tag: #cc2021

Day 1  - From the OS up Docker Image Builds
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Activity:**

- Introduction to GitPod on GitHub
- Hands on exercise using base OS images in GitPod

**Content:**

Introduction to Docker builds from OS base images and when to pursue this. 

**Goals:**

#. Use cases for building from the OS up
#. Understand base images like Alpine linux and their portability/size

**Optional Homework:**

Scratch Build with Alpine Linux to perform a task

Day 2 - Accelerating Your Analyses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Activity:**

- Use OpenScienceGrid to scale
- NVIDIA GPU acceleration discussion 

**Content:**

Introduction to OpenScienceGrid. 

**Goals:**

#. Introduction to what Dockerfiles are and what you use them for
#. Understand apps on CyVerse are referencing Docker containers
#. Know how to navigate CyVerse Discovery Environment
#. Start thinking about how to modify an official CyVerse image

Day 3 - Integrating Docker Containers onto CyVerse
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Activity:**

- Modifying official CyVerse Dockerfiles
- App integration into the Discovery environment
- Discuss challenges associated with "containerization"

**Content:**

Modification of official CyVerse images. Discuss how containers integrate onto CyVerse. Problems associated with containers.

**Goals:**

#. Understand how to modify Dockerfiles and best practices (for CyVerse and beyond)
#. Learn to integrate docker applications into CyVerse & where to get help
#. Be able to list the limitations and challenges associated with containerized analyses


.. |CyVerse_logo2| image:: ../img/cyverse_learning.png
    :width: 500
.. _CyVerse_logo2: http://learning.cyverse.org/

.. |Home_Icon| image:: ../img/homeicon.png
    :width: 25
    :height: 25

.. _Home_Icon: http://learning.cyverse.org/

.. |Containers in Distributed Computing| raw:: html

    <a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1qotXod2o_XEW2g7NN4eAlThlBjtdftv_efYJmuOHrVs/edit?usp=sharing" target="blank">Containers in Distributed Computing</a>

.. |Container technology| raw:: html

    <a href="https://arizona.box.com/s/iy0gop36ppi8ui9349dgbt8eug5b578y" target="blank">Container technology</a>

Commit message:

updated adv agenda with more pointed topics

getting_started/adv_agenda.rst, after:

.. include:: ../cyverse_rst_defined_substitutions.txt

|CyVerse_logo2|_

|Home_Icon|_
`Learning Center Home <http://learning.cyverse.org/>`_

**Agenda**
==========

Advanced Workshop Days are at the following times: 
9:00AM–1:00PM US Pacific Time (12:00PM–4:00PM US Eastern Time)


.. IMPORTANT::

    Please fill out the `weekly lesson feedback form <https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScEFhSXB52OegkXwXE0HISxIjCuBIiyi-qD4DYuDHhRe1k3fg/viewform?usp=sf_link>`_


Below are the schedule and classroom materials for Container Camp 2021.

This workshop runs under a `Code of Conduct <../getting_started/main.html>`_.
Please respect it and be excellent to each other!

Twitter hash tag: #cc2021

Day 1  - From the OS up Docker Image Builds
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Activity:**

- Introduction to GitPod on GitHub
- Hands on exercise using base OS images in GitPod

**Content:**

Introduction to Docker builds from OS base images and when to pursue this. 

**Goals:**

#. Use cases for building from the OS up
#. Understand base images like Alpine linux and their portability/size

**Optional Homework:**

Scratch Build with Alpine Linux to perform a task

Day 2 - Accelerating Your Analyses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Activity:**

- Use OpenScienceGrid to scale
- NVIDIA GPU acceleration discussion 

**Content:**

Introduction to OpenScienceGrid. Introduction to GPU acceleration with official NVIDIA images and special considerations for Docker run statements.

**Goals:**

#. Introduction to OpenScienceGrid (OSG)
#. Understand OSG applications on CyVerse
#. Know where to look for NVIDIA images
#. Define use cases for OSG and/or NVIDIA acceleration of analyses 

Day 3 - Breakout Sessions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Activity:**

- Breakout into domain specific and special topic sections

**Content:**

Domain science breakout sessions. Examples: bioinformatics, geospatial analysis, deep learning.

**Goals:**

Dependent on breakout section topics.

.. |CyVerse_logo2| image:: ../img/cyverse_learning.png
    :width: 500
.. _CyVerse_logo2: http://learning.cyverse.org/

.. |Home_Icon| image:: ../img/homeicon.png
    :width: 25
    :height: 25

.. _Home_Icon: http://learning.cyverse.org/

.. |Containers in Distributed Computing| raw:: html

    <a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1qotXod2o_XEW2g7NN4eAlThlBjtdftv_efYJmuOHrVs/edit?usp=sharing" target="blank">Containers in Distributed Computing</a>

.. |Container technology| raw:: html

    <a href="https://arizona.box.com/s/iy0gop36ppi8ui9349dgbt8eug5b578y" target="blank">Container technology</a>
